Co-expression-Analysis

DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIES

Brassica napus (B. napus), known as rapeseed or oilseed rape is a dicotyledonous plant originating from the brassicaceae family, a major group of angiosperms. This allopolyploid species results from the spontaneous hybridization of Brassica rapa and Brassica oleracea. Rich in polyphenols and glucosinolates, it serves as edible oil for both humans and animals, and is also used in industrial purposes as a biodiesel, plastic and lubricant. It is a versatile species with similar anatomy as other angiosperms. The root system of Brassica napus consists of a central taproot with lateral roots allowing the plant to anchor itself in the soil. Apart from its broad, smooth, and slightly hairy leaves, B. napus is known for its distinct yellow flowers which aid in reproduction. The genome size of B. napus is approximately 1,200,000,000 base-pairs in length which is considered relatively large in comparison to other plant species due to its allotetraploid nature. An allotetraploid, B. napus in context, refers to a species with a chromosome number of 2n = 38, from the hybridization of the two diploid Brassica species mentioned above (B. rapa and B. oleracea). Each diploid species contains AA genome and CC genome, respectively, contributing to the set of chromosomes forming the tetraploid obtaining the genome AACC. The complexity of the genomic structure is reflected through the estimated number of genes as 85,407. All these factors contribute to the adaptability and genetic variation of B. napus, allowing it to be a dominant crop used in agriculture.

NETWORK ANALYSIS

From the Mapman annotation, 1015 genes were identified. The major components of the photosystem include photosystem I (PSI) and photosystem II (PSII); responsible for the light reactions of photosynthesis whereby light energy is converted into chemical energy, light-harvesting complexes (LHC) of accumulating sunlight and transferring energy between the photosystems, ATP synthase producing ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate from the generated proton gradient across the plasma membrane, and cytochrome b6f complex that mediates electron transfer between the photosystems and proton translocation. Finding the most connected gene required a two-step method. Firstly, in order to store all the co-expressed genes, we needed to locate them. The genes in their expression profiles were saved as a dictionary called ‘id_to_exp’. To identify only the co-expressed genes, we used the classic ‘double for-loop’ method to analyse every gene with one another. The analysis done by “stats.pearson” gave out the Pearson correlation coefficient, ‘r’. Through trial and error, we defined the cut-off r-value as 0.9925 to get back roughly 100 pairs of co-expressed genes. Then, to find the most co-expressed genes, we created an empty dictionary, and used two for-loops to run through every gene in every co-expressed pair list in “network”. The principle of this method is that if the gene has not appeared before, it gets added to the dictionary with a count of 1. If it has, we simply increase the count of that gene in the dictionary by 1. Thus, we found out the most co-expressed gene.

CO-EXPRESSION LIST ANALYSIS

Out of the 50 co-expressed genes, only 30 genes were identified as photosynthesis-related. Among the 30 genes, 6 are used in PS-II complex, 5 in NDH subcomplex, 6 in cytochrome complex, 4 in ATP synthase subcomplex, 4 in PS-I complex, 2 in small plastid ribosomal-subunit proteome, and 1 each in ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), CCR4-NOT complex, and AAA-ATPase motor complex. This aligns with the gene’s role in photosynthesis. The PS-I complex in plants captures light energy to reduce NADP to NADPH (5), while the PS-II complex catalyses light-induced oxidation of water in light-dependent photosynthesis (6), using energy from ATP hydrolysis generated by the ATP synthase complex. The NDH subcomplex mediates cyclic electron transport (7) while the cytochrome complex aids the electron transport chain (8). This all in all ensures that movement of electrons for the light-dependent and Calvin cycle in photosynthesis. There are also other genes that are co-expressed less, such as those encoding for small plastid ribosomal-subunit proteome, which constitutes the production of chloroplasts (10), RuBisCO for carbon dioxide fixation in light-dependent photosynthesis (4). Unexpectedly, there are some co-expressed genes that are not directly linked with photosynthesis, such as those coding for CCR4-NOT complex, used in shortening of the poly(A)-tail (9), and AAA-ATPase for protein-degradation (11). These may be used in the degradation of nonfunctional chloroplast enzymes. Other unidentified genes are also mentioned which may be used in other functions such as cell wall organisation in chloroplasts, though further research needs to be conducted to confirm such theories.

EXPRESSION PROFILE ANALYSIS

The given bar plot depicts the expression of the photosynthetic genes in samples with different stress types and intensities. The maximum gene expression is observed in the study conducted to elucidate the response to cold stress in Brassica napus. This result corresponds to cold treatment for 2 hours and shows that the effect of this abiotic stress is seen through high co-expression of genes responsible for photosynthesis, as the plant requires a higher number of proteins to compensate for environmental stress. The second highest in gene expression is the control crops for a study accounting for stress caused by elements Selenium and Cadmium in B. napus. The expression in samples grown in the nutrient medium without these toxic elements is higher than those with Se and Ca shows that toxicity of growth medium may have an impact on the expression of genes controlling photosynthesis and functioning of chloroplasts. Overall, the gene expression ranges from most (cold stress for 2 hours) to the least in stress conditions caused by Aluminium toxicity.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, this project aims at identifying the most co-expressed genes in the crop, Brassica napus. Using our knowledge of Python, we thus plotted the changes in gene expression patterns in the crop when exposed to different environmental stresses, mainly cold to freezing stress at different temperatures and toxic elements including Aluminium, Selenium and Cadmium. A majority of genes identified by us aid in photosynthesis by constituting different integral complexes, such as PSI, PSII, cytochrome, RuBisCO, NDH, ribosomal subunits and in AAA-ATPase motor complex. Expression of the genes in these varies according to the experiment conducted and the stress it is exposed to. Some unexpected genes were also mapped by us, mainly pertaining to the chloroplast, including but not limited to its degradation.
